---
layout: article.njk
title: On Design
date: 2019-06-28
---

I came across a discussion recently that centred around an idea; everyone is a designer. It prompted mixed responses including those from professional designers who felt very strongly that such a statement undermined the value and skills they have to offer. Other’s were “frustrated by designers tribalist identification as designers”. This raised a lot of questions for me.

Is everyone a designer? If that is the case then what is my purpose as a “professional” designer? Even more fundamentally, what is design and what is its purpose?

Big questions. I’m definitely not the first person to contemplate the meaning of design but the idea that anyone can be a designer is something that’s been in the back of my mind for a while.

## What is design?

Let’s start at the beginning. Here are some definitions from Oxford Dictionary:

* The art or action of conceiving of and producing a plan or drawing of something before it is made.
* Do or plan (something) with a specific purpose in mind.
* As a result of a plan; intentionally.

That seems straightforward. However, Dieter Rams describes good design as something that is innovative, honest, makes products understandable and is thorough down to the last detail. His principles make design sound more like a force or an ideology than anything tangible.

I find myself increasingly frustrated by a lack of clarity which is only compounded whenever I read things like this:

> “Design puts the world in your hands.”

> “It is a way of seeing; a way of interacting with the world. It is a way of life.”

What the hell does that even mean? Fear not, there is hope. Usability Body of Knowledge describes design as:

* A discipline that explores the dialogue between products, people, and contexts.
* A process that defines a solution to help people achieve their goals.
* An artefact produced as the result of solution definition.

That makes much more sense. Design isn’t just one thing; it’s a discipline, a process and an artefact.

## What does it mean to be a designer?

Given that we now have a better understanding of what design is, let’s take a crack at defining the role of a designer:

* Design as a discipline - a designer understands products, people and contexts.
* Design as a process - a designer defines solutions.
* Design as an artefact - a designer produces a design from a solution definition.

Here’s an excerpt from an interview with Jony Ive that gives an interesting insight into some of the characteristics of designers:

> “As designers we have to be comfortable living in the future where there is a lot of ambiguity, in terms of, there are not a lot of specific answers to the questions that we have.”

> “Curiosity means that at some level you’re completely comfortable with being wrong. Curiosity gives space to other people, it doesn’t steal their oxygen.”

Now I feel a bit silly because I’m going to re-quote something I poo-pooed above - “It’s a way of life”. It’s starting to sound like being a designer is as much about having the right frame of mind as it is about doing the work. I think this is what the commenters in the original discussion were trying to articulate. Designers are curious by nature, are not afraid to ask questions and uncover answers to understand problems.

## Is everyone a designer?

Yes, I think everyone can be a designer. We use the term too literally to refer to specific roles within a company when in reality the majority of people are designing something; engineers design technical systems, marketers design messages, managers design teams and companies, etc. Interestingly none of those roles include the title “designer” so what makes us so special that we get to wear it?

Ultimately I believe being a designer is about making intentional decisions. Those decisions are guided by goals and constraints. The best designers can identify all of the constraints of the context within which they work and create something within that space.